Title: Dear Colleague Letter - Joint NSF/ENG and AFOSR Funding Opportunity -
       EAGERs to Energize Innovative Research and Development on Dynamic Data
       Systems
Date:  8/6/2014

   NSF 14-108

Dear Colleague Letter - Joint NSF/ENG and AFOSR Funding Opportunity -
EAGERs to Energize Innovative Research and Development on Dynamic Data
Systems

   July 29, 2014

   The Division of Electrical, Communications and Cyber Systems (ECCS) of
   the Engineering Directorate at the National Science Foundation (NSF),
   in collaboration with the Air Force Office of Scientific Research
   (AFOSR), seek Early Concept Grants for Exploratory Research (EAGER)
   proposals with the potential to transform our ability to understand,
   manage and control the operation of complex, multi-entity natural or
   engineered systems, through innovative approaches that consider new
   dimensions in Big Data, Big Computing, and a symbiotic combination of
   Data and Computing. NSF's and AFOSR's interests lie in highly
   innovative projects in their early stages that address unique
   challenges and identify fruitful directions for analytics to transform
   engineering and scientific practice across various relevant
   disciplines and scales. The joint interests of both AFOSR and NSF
   include novel research in technical areas fostered by the DDDAS
   (Dynamic Data Driven Applications Systems) Program.

   The present letter aims to identify opportunities for new capabilities
   along three key, innovative, and intertwined science and engineering
   directions for Big Data, Big Computing, and the relation between Data
   and Computing. Specifically:

     * The next wave of Big Data is Dynamic Data arising from ubiquitous
       sensing and control in engineered and natural systems, through
       multitudes of heterogeneous sensors and controllers instrumenting
       these systems. This emerging paradigm calls for seamless and
       dynamic integration of traditional big data with real-time and
       archival data relating to ubiquitous sensing and control. The
       resulting Large-scale Dynamic Data environment makes it imperative
       to dynamically and adaptively manage and schedule these
       heterogeneous and distributed large-scale data resources, such
       that these multimodal and multifidelity data are intelligently
       collected, correlated, and utilized to optimize the understanding,
       analysis, and operational conditions of engineered and natural
       multi-entity systems.
     * Adding to this important dimension of Dynamic Data is an extended
       view of Big Computing, which includes a new dimension of computing
       at the sensor and controller levels. The resulting Large-scale Big
       Computing environment consists of a set of computing platforms
       ranging from high-end and mid-range computing, to computing on the
       multitudes of sensors and controllers, with this collective set
       integrated in a dynamic and seamless manner and viewed as a
       unified platform.
     * In the context of Large-scale Dynamic Data and Large-scale Big
       Computing, the present letter seeks to foster innovative ideas for
       new capabilities which result from dynamic integration between
       Data and Computing whereby systems instrumentation data and
       executing models of these systems are dynamically integrated in a
       feedback control loop, for improved understanding, analysis, and
       optimized management of operational conditions of engineered and
       natural multi-entity systems.

   The nature and scope of this initiative are multidisciplinary, drawing
   from theoretical and applied research in signal processing, machine
   learning, mathematics, statistics, optimization, complex systems
   modeling and simulation, distributed and fault-tolerant computing,
   storage, communications and networking, and large-scale systems
   engineering and integration. The objective of this EAGER call is to
   engage scientists and engineers experienced in big-scale natural or
   engineered systems as key drivers for the aforementioned innovative
   directions, and transform our ability to understand and exploit such
   innovations to enable new capabilities. Examples of possible topics
   that researchers may investigate on can be found in [1]Reference 1.

EAGER submission requirements

    1. PI Eligibility: EAGER proposal inquiries will be accepted from a
       Principal Investigator (PI) or any consortium of investigators led
       by a PI at an eligible U.S. institution. An investigator may be
       included in only one submission in response to this Dear Colleague
       Letter; if more than one is submitted, only the first one
       submitted will be considered.
    2. Deadlines: A) The deadline for submitting EAGER proposals is
       September 12, 2014. B) No later than August 29, 2014, potential
       proposers must submit an email , to both of the Program Officers
       listed below. The email shall include a tentative proposal title,
       a short abstract, and a list of PI and co-PIs along with their
       institutions. Use the following subject line in the email: "Intent
       for Dynamic Data Systems submission."
    3. Submission procedure: Submission of EAGER proposals must be done
       via Fastlane or Grants.gov following the NSF's Grant Proposal
       Guide instructions in GPG Chapter II.D.2. The proposal should
       clearly indicate the reason that the work is appropriate for EAGER
       support. Proposers must identify the program announcement number
       for the ECCS division: PD 13-7564. The project title must begin
       with the tag "EAGER-DynamicData:".
    4. Budgetary information: It is anticipated that each EAGER award may
       range between $80K and $150K per 12-month year, for up to 24
       months. The requested budget must be clearly justified and must be
       commensurate with the goals of the effort. Estimated program
       budget, number of awards and average award size/duration are
       subject to the availability of funds.
    5. Proposal processing and review procedure: NSF and AFOSR will
       convene a joint panel to review the submitted EAGER proposals, and
       those ideas that best meet the goals of this Dear Colleague Letter
       will be awarded. Proposers are referred to the website in
       [2]Reference 1 for additional information.

   Technical Points of Contact:

   Zhi Tian
   Program Director
   NSF/ENG/ECCS Division
   [3]ztian@nsf.gov
   703-292-8839

   Frederica Darema
   AFOSR
   [4]Frederica.Darema@us.af.mil
   703-588-1926

   References

    1. [5]APPENDIX
    2. [6]https://community.apan.org/afosr/w/researchareas/7661.dynamic-d
       ata-driven-applications-systems-dddas.aspx;
       [7]http://www.nsf.gov/cise/cns/dddas/: Dynamic Data-Driven
       Application Systems (DDDAS) -InfoSymbiotic Systems
    3. [8]http://www.dtc.umn.edu/bigdata/: NSF Workshop on Big Data-From
       Signal Processing to Systems Engineering, March 21-22, 2013.


APPENDIX

   In 2012 the White House announced the Big Data Research and
   Development Initiative to mobilize the research and development
   enterprise towards big data analytics for solving some of the nation's
   most pressing challenges. NSF has responded with Programs which have
   emphasized the class of Big Data which "come from many disparate
   sources, including scientific instruments, medical devices,
   telescopes, microscopes, satellites; digital media including text,
   video, audio, email, weblogs, twitter feeds, image collections, click
   streams and financial transactions; dynamic sensor, social, and other
   types of networks; scientific simulations, models, and surveys; or
   computational analyses of observational data." The present Dear
   Colleague Letter (DCL) seeks to create new capabilities through
   synergistic multidisciplinary research along the three research axes
   discussed in the DCL.

   Specifically, within the context of these three new directions, as
   articulated in the DCL, environments which involve data across
   multiple scales, computing across multiple scales, and dynamic
   integration of data and computing are expected to enable significant
   science and engineering advances, and yet also give rise to big
   challenges, some of which are accentuated by the complexity of the
   scales, modalities, and dynamic integration of data and computing
   considered here. Systems analysis and decision support often need to
   be performed in real time in response to the underlying dynamics of
   the phenomena of interest; as a result, performing analytics on
   voluminous datasets through centralized processing and storage units
   becomes infeasible, as the system environments considered here are by
   definition heterogeneous and distributed, combining many modalities of
   computing - high-end, real-time, multi-core based platforms and across
   multiple distributed data systems.

   The complex systems and support environments discussed here present a
   disruptive paradigm for scientists, engineers and optimization experts
   who are traditionally trained to seek exact or high-quality solutions
   from modest amounts of data. Large, dynamic and diverse scales of
   computing and systems instrumentation intrinsically create situations
   of incomplete and corrupted computations and data. In order to
   understand, analyze and support such complex systems, data and
   computation approximation methodologies are required to quickly
   generate results subject to time constraints and incomplete and
   corrupted data, while maintaining quantifiable fidelity. For robust,
   decentralized and online data analytics in the presence of missing
   data or corrupted measurements, there is an urgent need to explicitly
   account for the storage, query, time constraint, node failure, and
   communication burden.

   This DCL is aimed to identify new opportunities and foster research
   and development for novel and advanced analytical and experimental
   methods and capabilities, based on and exploiting new directions in
   Big Data and Big Computing articulated above. The following are
   examples of topics that researchers may consider for developing new
   theories, advanced computational methods and analytics coupled with
   innovative experimental techniques. These examples are only provided
   to engage researchers on novel research and to map out solutions
   towards key problems with ENG and AFOSR relevance; they are not
   intended to be prescriptive nor imply any special emphasis or
   priority.
   
     * Dynamic data driven statistical learning and other numeric and
       non-numeric multifidelity and scalable methodologies (e.g. PCA and
       POD) for robust, decentralized and real-time data analytics, where
       the classical resources of the theory of computation (e.g., time,
       space, energy, communication capacity) vie with the data resource
       in dynamic and adaptive ways.
     * Methods for adaptive computations of application systems models
       and simulations, in which dynamic data inputs drive executing
       models and in reverse to the executing applications controlling
       the instrumentation. Engineering of systems and simulation models
       for data collection and utilization by leveraging the unique
       characteristics and structures of engineered data.
     * Multi-entity systems analysis and decision support in the presence
       of errors or incompleteness in the collected and computed data.
     * Identification of appropriate data-centric approximation
       methodologies to exchange complexity for accuracy in massive,
       multimodal, multifidelity, decentralized signal and data analysis
       tasks and cooperative sensor planning.
     * Hardware-software and analog-digital hybrid systems for Big Data
       and Big Computing applications (as defined in this call). New
       methodologies for programming across a range of computing and data
       intensive tasks, integrating real-time communications, and
       building distributed Large-scale Dynamic Data and Large- scale Big
       Computing infrastructures.
     * Identification of emerging engineering disciplines and appropriate
       pathways where traditional disciplinary research and development
       can be revolutionized by Large-scale Dynamic Data and Large-scale
       Big Computing.

References

   1. http://nsf.gov/pubs/2014/nsf14108/nsf14108.htm#appendix
   2. http://nsf.gov/pubs/2014/nsf14108/nsf14108.htm#appendix
   3. mailto:ztian@nsf.gov
   4. mailto:Frederica.Darema@us.af.mil
   5. http://nsf.gov/pubs/2014/nsf14108/nsf14108.htm#appendix
   6. https://community.apan.org/afosr/w/researchareas/7661.
   dynamic-data-driven-applications-systems-dddas.aspx
   7. http://www.nsf.gov/cise/cns/dddas/
   8. http://www.dtc.umn.edu/bigdata/
 
 